#summary This is a listing of all the various projects which the Ponomar team are working on.

= Introduction =

This is an initial attempt to catalogue all the various projects that the Ponomar Team is involved in. PLEASE feel free to edit and add to this listing. Once we've got this listing fairly complete, I would like to begin to develop a wiki-based presentation of all our materials, so that we can keep track of our progress and not lose information in past e-mails (as we have been currently doing). Organisation is key to projects being completed properly. Thanks! -- Nikita

= Details =

*1. Unicode Slavonic Font Encoding*

  * Manifesto
  * Periodization of Slavonic Scripts
  * Catalogue of Slavonic Characters - The Complete Character Set
  * Historical Variants / Variation Selectors
  * Character Proposals in Progress
  * Keyboard Layouts & Drivers
  * Text Encoding Conversion & Utilities
  * Other Projects & "Competing" Developers

*2. Digital Chant Projects*

  * Ponomar OpenMusic Project
  * LilyChant

*3A. Znamenny Chant Font Encoding*

  * Identification of the Complete Character Range
  * Catalogue of Neumes
  * Unicode Character Proposals
  * Development of Znamenny "Kriuki" Fonts

*3B. Kievan Notation Font encoding*

  * Identification of the Complete Character Range
  * Unicode Character Proposals
  * Development of Kievan "Square Note" Fonts

*Reference Articles & Documentation*

  * Variation Selectors
  * Kendema, Trema, Double Grave Accent
  * FontForge Techniques & Procedures
  * Keyboard Layouts & Drivers (and their development)

*Links*

  * Related Projects